Trauma-induced coagulopathy (TIC) can be defined as an impairment of blood clotting that occurs soon after injury (Frith 2010). A diagnosis of TIC on admission to hospital carries a mortality rate amongst patients of up to 50%, and is often associated with increased burdens of transfusion, greater risks of organ injury and septic complications, and longer stays in critical care (Brohi 2003; MacLeod 2003; Maegele 2007). Worldwide, trauma is the leading cause of mortality and disability in adults under the age of 36 years (Hess 2009), and in the UK 40% of all trauma deaths are as a result of haemorrhage (Frith 2010), whilst shock and coagulopathy upon admission have both been independently associated with both massive transfusion and increased mortality (Spinella 2009). Equally in the combat setting, bleeding is the largest cause of death on the battlefield (Holcomb 2007).  

Various terms such as TIC, ‘acute traumatic coagulopathy' (ATC) and ‘acute coagulopathy of trauma shock’ are used to describe these early coagulation changes. None of these terms have taken particular precedence and all are widespread within the trauma literature. For the purposes of this review we will use the term TIC to describe the hypocoagulable changes that occur within the first 24 hours following injury due to a variety of different and highly interlinked causes, i.e. hypoperfusion, ongoing bleeding and consumption of clotting factors, haemodilution, acidosis, hypothermia and ATC.

In the absence of embedded clinical consensus, the coagulopathic range we use is based on prothrombin time ratio (PTr)/international normalized ratio (INR). Two different coagulopathic ranges are commonly used within the research and clinical literature: a PTr/INR count of 1.2 or above; and a PTr/INR count of 1.5 or above is considered coagulopathic (further detail is given in the section on Reference standards). We will be including both these ranges within our review. This decision was reached through review of the literature and discussion with the report authors, including experts in haematology and trauma medicine.

The aetiology of coagulopathy associated with trauma is not fully understood. In non-trauma situations, blood clots form through a chain of actions; first, platelets form a sticky clump on the blood vessel wall at the site of injury. This clot is weak, but soon a cascade of clotting proteins generates fibrin, a protein that meshes the platelets and some red blood cells together to produce a far stronger clot. This process is called coagulation, but it can become disordered; this happens in around a quarter of trauma patients. The underlying reasons for this disruption are still unknown, but the combination of tissue damage and shock are contributory factors, as is the presence of hypoperfusion through severe blood loss (Barts & The London 2011).

Early recognition of the nature of the clotting defect has been acknowledged as increasingly important to guide replacement of clotting factors alongside blood volume maintenance and red cell replacement. There are, however, no validated methods to guide therapy effectively. This leads to both over-transfusion and under-transfusion, reduction in efficacy, increased wastage and exposure to risk. These issues can be exacerbated in disasters where timely availability of blood and component therapy is vital but severely resource constrained. 